In this part of the course,
we've been talking about ways in which
we failed to make correct
interpretations in our analysis.
Some of these are related
to how we think and
how we make assumptions and inferences.
But we can also get ourselves into
trouble by choosing to show data and
results in a way that either doesn't
tell the whole story or worse,
tells the wrong story entirely.
In this video, we're going to cover
a few common ways in which we distort
information when we show
it in a certain way.
The cases we'll talk
about are just examples.
You'll find that we can be
incredibly creative at finding new
ways to distort data.
But these should give you a sense for
what to watch out for in your own work and
that of your colleagues.
The first one is what we like
to call the Lie of Averages.
We regularly use summary statistics
such as average, medians and
variances to describe data.
And in many circumstances that's
an entirely appropriate thing to do,
but that's not always the case.
A great illustration of how
summary statistics can lead us to
some wrong conclusions is something
called Anscombe's quartet.
Consider these four sets of data,
each set has ten pairs of x and y values.
It turns out that this four sets of
data have almost identical statistical
properties.
The average of the x values is = to 9.
The average of the y values is = to 7.5.
The variance in the x values is = to 11.
The variance in the y values
is = to either 4.122 or 4.127.
The correlation between x and y is 0.816.
And the equation of the linear
regression line calculated
on each data set is y = 3.00 + 0.500x.
If all we have were these summary
statistics, we probably feel pretty
comfortable concluding that these four
groups are basically the same, right?
But what happens when we actually plot
the data and look at it visually?
Now, things don't look so similar.
In fact, it looks like there are four
completely different patterns underlying
the four data sets.
Armed with this information,
we'd actually had a really hard time
concluding that the groups are the same.
The point here is that how
data is distributed can
really make a huge difference
in the conclusions we draw.
This is particularly true in business.
The date we examine in the business
world often has very odd properties.
We have outliers that are driven
not by random events, but
by real process problems.
We see distributions in real that data
that haves spikes, troughs and gaps.
And we often encounter bimodal or
multimodal distributions that can be hard
to adequately describe
using summary statistics.
Here is a real world example
using some actual purchase data.
Specifically, this data shows the number
of purchases in some period by price.
This is an oddly shaped distribution.
There are a number of peaks around
common values like 39.95 and 995.
There appear to be some gaps
in some clusters of activity.
Prices range from 0 to 479.95.
How much insight will we gain simply
by looking at summary statistics?
Now, we don't mean to suggest that
you shouldn't use averages and
other statistics.
Again, there are many cases
where that's just fine.
But it's usually not a bad idea to at
least take a look at the distribution,
to make sure you're not missing something.
So that's what we mean
by the Lie of Averages.
The second distortion we'll talk about
is what I refer to as Chart Myopia.
Let's say we're in a regional
sales review meeting and
the following data is presented.
What do we see?
Well, it looks like sales declined quite
a bit between May and August of 2016.
We should probably figure
out what's going on and
see if we l can reverse the trend, right?
Well, not so fast, what's missing?
If you said scale or
the y axis values, you're right.
Let's add that and
see how it changes the picture.
Okay, so this adds some perspective.
Sales haven't declined by half, but
they've still gone down
three months in a row.
Maybe we should still
figure out why that's happening
even if the decline is smaller.
What do you think?
Well, suppose we actually
use the same scale, but
looked at the data over a wider
range of time like this.
When we look at the data
as part of a longer series,
we see that there's actually quite
a bit of historical variation in sales.
Now, it's not so
clear that there's a trend here at all.
Maybe the decline happened
purely by chance.
And in any case,
that shorter run of sales is more or
less in line with the sales
we see over a wider period.
You can probably see where this is going,
but
let's take it a step further
just to drive the point home.
Let's look at the complete
time series of data, but
on a full y-axis scale
that starts at zero.
This chart tells an entirely
different story.
From this perspective, it looks like
there's no variation in sales at all.
In fact, the sales trend looks completely
flat and remarkably consistent.
If we'd have shown this
view first in our meeting,
we'd have probably just move on to the
next agenda item without a second thought.
So the point of Chart Myopia is that
if you zoom enough on anything,
you can make insignificant
things look significant.
Of course, the converse can also be true.
As analysts, we should strive to show
things in a way that puts them in
perspective and
shows them in the right context.
Let's move on to the third and
last distortion we'll cover in this video.
This one I'm going to call
the Disembodied Numerator distortion.
Suppose we're a healthcare system, where
we're looking at the number of hospital
acquired infections that occurred at each
of our hospitals over a period of time.
This is considered to be a key measure of
quality in the delivery of health care.
The lower the number of
infections the better.
We gathered together the hospital
presidents to review the data, and
we start with this chart.
We immediately focused on Hospital B and
their high number of infections relative
to the other hospitals,
especially Hospital A.
We suggest that Hospital B study Hospital
A to learn what their doing to achieve
better results.
So, what's missing in this discussion?
Well, while the number of infections
is important, we need to put it in
the context of how many patients
were actually at the hospital.
What were really should be asking is,
out of how many?
So, let's add a little
information to our chart.
Namely, the number of patient
admissions that happened over the same
period of time.
Now, we see that while Hospital B may have
had the highest number of infections,
they also had the highest
number of admissions.
Conversely, while Hospital A may have
had the lowest number of infections,
they also had the lowest
number of admissions.
So it's not quite as clear who's
really doing well and who's not.
However, when we add the actual
infection rate to the chart,
we start to get some meaningful insights.
When we look at the infection
rate we see that Hospitals B and
C are actually performing best.
While Hospital A is the worst performer
with the highest infection rate,
just the opposite of our
original conclusion.
This might seem like a pretty obvious
example, but sometimes the impact
of the Disembodied Numerator
problem is not as straightforward.
Here's a real example.
In wireless companies,
the number of customers acquisitions and
customers defections
are tracked very closely.
In fact, it's not uncommon for
companies to have daily reports
which break down these numbers by region,
customer type or product type.
And these reports are used to monitor and
act on sales and retention tactics.
A real company had such a report.
And to avoid the Disembodied Numerator
problem, they not only reported
the absolutely number of acquisition and
defections, but also the acquisition rate
and the defection rate relative to
the size of the respective group.
Again, region, customer type,
and product prototype.
So periodically leadership would
observe a spike in defection rate and
would quickly move to understand
what happened and fix it.
This all sounds very reasonable,
except for one small nuance.
The company in question had most
customers on two year contracts.
This meant that if a customer
cancelled prior two years,
they pay a significant penalty.
So when do you think
customers did tend to cancel?
If you said right after their
two years are up, you're right.
In fact, if we were to look at
monthly cancellation rates by customer
tenure in months,
we'd find something like this.
Note the huge spike that happens
right after the 24 month point.
Let's think about our daily sales and
cancellation report.
Suppose we recently had a really big
promotion that brought in larger than
normal number of new customers, what would
we expect to see in about two years?
That's right, we'd expect to see a larger
than normal number of cancellations.
It turns out that while our company
thought they had accounted for
the Disembodied Numerator distortion,
they really hadn't.
We regularly discovered that causes of
spikes in cancellation rates were actually
spikes in acquisitions that
happened two years ago.
And more importantly this meant there
was really no problem to solve.
The company would have been better
served looking at cancellations by
tenure versus cancellations by region,
customer type or product.
Using the wrong denominator can be just
as bad as having no denominator at all.
The takeaway here is pretty simple,
always ask, out of how many?
And try to include rates whenever
possible to present a clear and
more complete picture of
what's really going on.
As we said at the start of the video,
we can be really creative
in how we distort data.
However, we hope that by calling your
attention to a few common distortions,
you'll be able to avoid
some presentation pitfalls.
Let's quickly review what we covered.
We learned about the Lie of Averages,
or how using only summery statistics can
misrepresent the underlying
nuances of our data.
We discussed Chart Myopia, or
how our data can tell the wrong story if
we focus our visualizations too narrowly.
And we explored the Disembodied Numerator
problem, where counts by themselves don't
tell the whole story,
unless we ask out of how many.
Hope you enjoyed the video.
And we'll see you next time.